Chapter One

I returned from the City about three o'clock on that May afternoon
pretty well disgusted with life.  I had been three months in the Old
Country, and was fed up with it.  If anyone had told me a year ago that
I would have been feeling like that I should have laughed at him; but
there was the fact.  The weather made me liverish, the talk of the
ordinary Englishman made me sick. I couldn't get enough exercise, and
the amusements of London seemed as flat as soda-water that has been
standing in the sun.  'Richard Hannay,' I kept telling myself, 'you
have got into the wrong ditch, my friend, and you had better climb out.'

It made me bite my lips to think of the plans I had been building up
those last years in Bulawayo.  I had got my pile--not one of the big
ones, but good enough for me; and I had figured out all kinds of ways
of enjoying myself.  My father had brought me out from Scotland at the
age of six, and I had never been home since; so England was a sort of
Arabian Nights to me, and I counted on stopping there for the rest of
my days.


Chapter Two

I returned from the City about three o'clock on that May afternoon
pretty well disgusted with life.  I had been three months in the Old
Country, and was fed up with it.  If anyone had told me a year ago that
I would have been feeling like that I should have laughed at him; but
there was the fact.  The weather made me liverish, the talk of the
ordinary Englishman made me sick. I couldn't get enough exercise, and
the amusements of London seemed as flat as soda-water that has been
standing in the sun.  'Richard Hannay,' I kept telling myself, 'you
have got into the wrong ditch, my friend, and you had better climb out.'

It made me bite my lips to think of the plans I had been building up
those last years in Bulawayo.  I had got my pile--not one of the big
ones, but good enough for me; and I had figured out all kinds of ways
of enjoying myself.  My father had brought me out from Scotland at the
age of six, and I had never been home since; so England was a sort of
Arabian Nights to me, and I counted on stopping there for the rest of
my days.


Chapter Three

I returned from the City about three o'clock on that May afternoon
pretty well disgusted with life.  I had been three months in the Old
Country, and was fed up with it.  If anyone had told me a year ago that
I would have been feeling like that I should have laughed at him; but
there was the fact.  The weather made me liverish, the talk of the
ordinary Englishman made me sick. I couldn't get enough exercise, and
the amusements of London seemed as flat as soda-water that has been
standing in the sun.  'Richard Hannay,' I kept telling myself, 'you
have got into the wrong ditch, my friend, and you had better climb out.'

It made me bite my lips to think of the plans I had been building up
those last years in Bulawayo.  I had got my pile--not one of the big
ones, but good enough for me; and I had figured out all kinds of ways
of enjoying myself.  My father had brought me out from Scotland at the
age of six, and I had never been home since; so England was a sort of
Arabian Nights to me, and I counted on stopping there for the rest of
my days.


Chapter Four

I returned from the City about three o'clock on that May afternoon
pretty well disgusted with life.  I had been three months in the Old
Country, and was fed up with it.  If anyone had told me a year ago that
I would have been feeling like that I should have laughed at him; but
there was the fact.  The weather made me liverish, the talk of the
ordinary Englishman made me sick. I couldn't get enough exercise, and
the amusements of London seemed as flat as soda-water that has been
standing in the sun.  'Richard Hannay,' I kept telling myself, 'you
have got into the wrong ditch, my friend, and you had better climb out.'

It made me bite my lips to think of the plans I had been building up
those last years in Bulawayo.  I had got my pile--not one of the big
ones, but good enough for me; and I had figured out all kinds of ways
of enjoying myself.  My father had brought me out from Scotland at the
age of six, and I had never been home since; so England was a sort of
Arabian Nights to me, and I counted on stopping there for the rest of
my days.


I. This is not a chapter

I returned from the City about three o'clock on that May afternoon
pretty well disgusted with life.  I had been three months in the Old
Country, and was fed up with it.  If anyone had told me a year ago that
I would have been feeling like that I should have laughed at him; but
there was the fact.  The weather made me liverish, the talk of the
ordinary Englishman made me sick. I couldn't get enough exercise, and
the amusements of London seemed as flat as soda-water that has been
standing in the sun.  'Richard Hannay,' I kept telling myself, 'you
have got into the wrong ditch, my friend, and you had better climb out.'

It made me bite my lips to think of the plans I had been building up
those last years in Bulawayo.  I had got my pile--not one of the big
ones, but good enough for me; and I had figured out all kinds of ways
of enjoying myself.  My father had brought me out from Scotland at the
age of six, and I had never been home since; so England was a sort of
Arabian Nights to me, and I counted on stopping there for the rest of
my days.


This is not a chapter

I returned from the City about three o'clock on that May afternoon
pretty well disgusted with life.  I had been three months in the Old
Country, and was fed up with it.  If anyone had told me a year ago that
I would have been feeling like that I should have laughed at him; but
there was the fact.  The weather made me liverish, the talk of the
ordinary Englishman made me sick. I couldn't get enough exercise, and
the amusements of London seemed as flat as soda-water that has been
standing in the sun.  'Richard Hannay,' I kept telling myself, 'you
have got into the wrong ditch, my friend, and you had better climb out.'

It made me bite my lips to think of the plans I had been building up
those last years in Bulawayo.  I had got my pile--not one of the big
ones, but good enough for me; and I had figured out all kinds of ways
of enjoying myself.  My father had brought me out from Scotland at the
age of six, and I had never been home since; so England was a sort of
Arabian Nights to me, and I counted on stopping there for the rest of
my days.


Chapter Five

I returned from the City about three o'clock on that May afternoon
pretty well disgusted with life.  I had been three months in the Old
Country, and was fed up with it.  If anyone had told me a year ago that
I would have been feeling like that I should have laughed at him; but
there was the fact.  The weather made me liverish, the talk of the
ordinary Englishman made me sick. I couldn't get enough exercise, and
the amusements of London seemed as flat as soda-water that has been
standing in the sun.  'Richard Hannay,' I kept telling myself, 'you
have got into the wrong ditch, my friend, and you had better climb out.'

It made me bite my lips to think of the plans I had been building up
those last years in Bulawayo.  I had got my pile--not one of the big
ones, but good enough for me; and I had figured out all kinds of ways
of enjoying myself.  My father had brought me out from Scotland at the
age of six, and I had never been home since; so England was a sort of
Arabian Nights to me, and I counted on stopping there for the rest of
my days.


Chapter Six

I returned from the City about three o'clock on that May afternoon
pretty well disgusted with life.  I had been three months in the Old
Country, and was fed up with it.  If anyone had told me a year ago that
I would have been feeling like that I should have laughed at him; but
there was the fact.  The weather made me liverish, the talk of the
ordinary Englishman made me sick. I couldn't get enough exercise, and
the amusements of London seemed as flat as soda-water that has been
standing in the sun.  'Richard Hannay,' I kept telling myself, 'you
have got into the wrong ditch, my friend, and you had better climb out.'

It made me bite my lips to think of the plans I had been building up
those last years in Bulawayo.  I had got my pile--not one of the big
ones, but good enough for me; and I had figured out all kinds of ways
of enjoying myself.  My father had brought me out from Scotland at the
age of six, and I had never been home since; so England was a sort of
Arabian Nights to me, and I counted on stopping there for the rest of
my days.

